---
layout: post
title: Paper Review - Operating System Support for Database Management 
category: eecs584
---

Another Stonebraker paper, although published considerably earlier than the previous readings, this publication seeks to examining operating system services in the context of database management systems. The paper addresses several problems in operating system facilities when applied to database management. Generally, Stonebraker asserts that operating systems offer too much abstraction over important low level facilities, and that while the operating system offers good general purpose performance and usability, it lacks fine grain control that can be devastating in a high performance database management system. The publication is structured in several parts, and this writeup will discuss potential weaknesses of the paper in each.

### Buffer Pool Management
Modern operating systems offer a "buffer pool" which acts as a main memory cache for the filesystem. This cache improves performance by both writing to disk in large blocks (less disk writes) and caching frequently accessed disk memory (less disk reads). While beneficial in general computing, the algorithms used (eg LRU) lose performance when faced with typical database tasks. Additionally, the operating system offers no services to assist in crash recovery. To remedy these problems, most DBMSes use their own user space buffer pool, duplicating a significant part of the OS.

### The File System
Stonebraker argues that character array filesystem representation is not useful to a DBMS, and prefers records management. However, it's unclear what modern systems implement or how much performance would improve. It's implied that current DBMSes simply build a records management atop a character array system. The author decrys the extra overhead of using three separate trees for a database filesystem, but simply states "the extra overhead ... is probably substantial" without giving much analysis of the situation.

### Performance
In this section the author presents several options for system architecture, especially the idea of process-per-user vs a server model. This section is quite outdated, but brings up important historical failings that architects had to deal with. Of course, modern operating system support for multithreading is quite good, and in most cases the overhead of thread context switching is low. In the author's later paper "Anatomy of a Database System", he presents more modern views of the performance problem and explains that process-per-user is generally now a legacy option. Stonebraker presents a solution to the performance issue, but he fails to recognize that market forces will eventually result in better threading support at the OS level.

### Consistancy Control
Operating systems fail to provide appropriate support for fine grain locks and crash recovery. Again, this problem is solved in most DBMSes by providing the support in user space, duplicating functionality. 

### Paged Virtual Memory
Stonebraker asserts that a large file will have a large page table, resulting in page faults for both the file and the table itself. He offers a solution to chunk files in address space, which would force the DBMS to provide significant bookkeeping. He lacks a solution for dealing with larger files, and offhandedly mentions that page file buffering is also a problem. This section feels unexplored, possibly because Stonebraker recognizes that main memory will increase in capacity quickly (his cited example of a 100K page table not fitting in RAM is laughable today). Still, it would have been beneficial for him to offer references to research on the subject if it existed at the time.

This paper succeeds at its intentions and offers a good overview of OS facilities and the weaknesses inherent when designing a DBMS, especially for the time it was written. However, it does feel rushed in some places where Stonebraker fails to offer adequate solutions or references to potential solutions. 
