---
layout: post
title: Planning Day 2 
category: eecs492
---
Methods we've discussed have some limitations, such as domain-specific heuristics. Planning represents an alternative that tends to use graph heuristics. Logic, for example, is not stateful and cannot handle temporal assumptions or changes in structure. Logic assumes everything happens at the same time, planning does not.

An action divides time into a "before" and "after". We'll use a language called PDDL to express action schema. Note that PDDL is a highly restricted subset of first order logic.

State is represented by a set of fluents, and those fluents must be *ground* and *functionless*. The action schema defines preconditions and the effects of a given action. This allows us to represent state.

Action(Fly(p, from, to))
    Precond: $$At(p, from) \wedge Plane(p) \wedge Airport(from) \wedge Airport(to)$$
    Effect: $$ \neg At(p, from) \wedge At(p, to) $$

### Forward Search

In this case, forward search is called progression planning. Basically we just move through the search space, with each constraint and action happening at any state change step. We can use any graph search algorithm for this, and any complete graph search algorithm will be complete for forward planning. Obviously this is quite inefficient, as there are many irrelevant actions. We need either: good heuristics OR backward search.

### Backward Search

This is what people actually use. Also called **regression** planning, it generates predecessors starting from the goal state. We are regressing through potential goals trying to not invalidate any states.
