---
layout: post
title: Paper Review - An Overview of Query Optimization in Relational Systems 
category: eecs584
---
The declarative SQL language is currently the lingua franca of modern relational, and occasionally non-relational, database systems. Converting such a high level syntax to commands in the DBMS is a difficult task as there are generally multiple representations for a given high level query, and each representation has different and sometimes highly varying performance. This paper seeks to present the basics of query optimization in relation databases. As the paper was written and published by Microsoft, we can assume there are implicit biases towards Microsoft SQL server, but the paper does a good job of addressing historical precedents.

The paper begins by providing a discussion of the System-R optimization framework, which could be considered the seminal work in query optimization, as well as SQL in general. System-R was developed by IBM as the first implementation of SQL, and thus their dynamic programming based query optimizer acted as an example for subsequent query optimization attempts. System-R provides powerful but limited query optimization for join ordering, and most implementations of SQL today use a variant of the dynamic programming idea for join ordering optimization. Unfortunately, current databases support optimization for other operators. For example, select-project-join queries may be flattened or outer joins may be reordered. The optimizer may attempt to collapse multi-block queries into a single block via multiple different methods. 

The author provides an overview of cost estimation, and explains how most cost optimization relies on database statistics collected over the life the system, such as histograms or correlation tables. This section is hand waved over, and very little actual information about cost estimation is given. This is likely because cost estimation is worth multiple papers alone, and the author felt he could not adequately present most of the material. The paper presents short looks at two query optimization projects - the query graph model based Starburst, and the goal driven Volcano/Cascades system. Finally, there is a short look at modern problems such as parallelism and user-defined functionality (like, for example, PostgreSQL). I really appreciated that the author included these looks forward as it allows the paper to stay fairly modern even years later. I also felt the paper was strong in examples, although the way these examples were presented had room for improvement. The examples were all in technical terms and understanding them took a significant amount of time. However, for the example with a visual aid I was able to understand the core concept quickly. More graphs and visuals would have greatly improved the accessibility of this paper, which is important in a survey paper like this.

