---
layout: post
title: Informed Search 
category: eecs492
---

## Review from Last Time
Last time we looked at breadth first search and uniform cost search, searches that are generally complete and optimal (UCS is optimal), but are quite time and especially space complex. Important difference to remember:

**Breadth First** - Goal test at generation

**Uniform Cost** - Goal test at expansion

We also looked at depth first search, which is not optimal but trades off for decreased space complexity. The DFS is complete only if used as a graph search, because in a tree search we could get stuck in a loop. Also not complete in infinite search spaces, obviously. If we limit the depth of DFS we can fix the problem with unbounded trees.

**DFS-limited** - Not complete, not optimal, but time complexity, while still exponential, is now $$O(b^L)$$ where L is the max depth. Same thing with space complexity, now $$O(bL)$$.

**Iterative Deepening** - Use DFS-limited but instead of fully exploring, expand the depth limit.

**Bidirectional Search** - Search from both the goal and the start, saves space by searching from the goal.

## Informed Search
We consider "best first search", where we evaluate nodes to expand based on an evaluation function. We exploit an f(n) to hopefully find the goal faster. 

**Heuristics** - Uses information not in the problem definition, where h(goal) = 0. This function is critical to a good search. 

**Greedy Best-First Search** - Expands the node closest to goal. Not necessarily optimal.

## A-star Search
Combines the path-cost as well as a heuristic that looks at straight-line distance to the goal.

Short time out for admissibility. An admissible heuristic never overestimates the cost to reach the goal, eg $$h(n)$$ < minimum achievable cost from n to goal. Consistency requires monotonic heuristic; it's a stronger version of admissibility that requires consistency from each next node also.

Tree-search is optimal if heuristic is admissible, and graph-search is optimal if consistent. The proof is important but this lecture was piss poor at explaining it.

If the heuristic is admissible, A-star is complete, optimally, and optimally efficient.

If we are *memory bound*, we can use either iterative deepening for A-star, or recursive best first search. 
