---
layout: post
title: Propositional Logic and Inference 
category: eecs492
---
## Knowledge Based Agents
Knowledge based agents reason over the knowledge base to come up with the best action. The hard thing is how to encode our knowledge in the machine.

**Entailment** - Relation between sentences where you can say one follows logically from another. If $$KB \mid= \alpha$$ we say that the knowledge base *entails* alpha. 

The basic way of checking for relationships is model checking, which just enumerates all models where $$\alpha$$ is true.

* Truth preserving - Only derive entailed sentences
* Complete - Can derive **all** sentences that are entailed

## Sentences

* Sentence is either an AtomicSequence or a ComplexSentence
* Atomic sentence is either True, False, or a Symbol
* Symbol is P, Q, R, etc
* A complex sentence includes logical operators

We also need semantics that determine the interpretation of symbols. Review logical prepositions here, aka NOT, AND, OR, IMPLIES, EQUALITY.

For the wumpus world, we can directly encode rules and develop a complete knowledge base. This method of model checking works but is infeasible. **Every known inference algorithm for propositional logic has worst case exponential complexity.** 
## Inference
Inference is the process by which sentences are derived from others. For a given inference method we want it to be sound (no false conclusions) and complete (no missing conclusions). So what inference methods can we implement?

### Model Checking
Generic inference, intuitive but not implementable. We literally just try everything and check that alpha is valid. We want to use a *proof based* method instead to eliminate model checking.
