---
layout: post
title: Paper Review - Automated Selection of Materialized Views and Indexes for SQL Databases 
category: eecs584
---
Modern relational and object-relational database systems support materialized views, which provide a more flexible way to encapsulate database structure. These views can offer significant performance gains when properly configured, because unlike indexes they can span multiple tables and have selections or GROUP BY over multiple columns. This paper, written by the Microsoft SQL research team, introduces a solution to automatically select both views and indexes based on "training data" provided by a database administrator. Unlike previous work, this paper focuses on combining index and view selection, as well as providing novel work at selecting materialized views.

The architecture of index and view selection is based on the Microsoft SQL server, and at times reuses portions of that codebase, specifically the query cost estimator and more generally the query optimizer. Because the search space of possible materialized view candidates is quite large, the authors seek to find interesting table subsets via a cost metric that considers the total cost of all queries in the workload and attempts to normalize that by the size of the tables in Q and T, where Q are tables referenced in the query and T is the table-subset. This is a requirement because some tables may be so small that building a view on them would be a waste of time - queries on the table are fast already. The authors also use the Microsoft SQL optimizer to prune the possible views, and then merge the views to try and include views that will answer multiple queries and thus be the most space efficient representations.

Unlike previous works, this paper examines both indexes and materialized views jointly when considering the retained options. This allows the optimizer to choose combinations of views and indexes that may be pruned by examining only one type of structure.

In contrast to many academic research papers, the techniques in this work have already been incorporated into a professional database tool. This allows the authors to create an impressive set of benchmarks and performance statistics. The authors provide convincing evidence that their methods are superior and robust, testing their finished product on several synthetic and real world datasets. An argument could be made that their datasets were not large enough for real world data, but because the competing techniques are so inefficient, the tuning wizard created in this paper is sometimes the only possible option. I also like that the authors offer not only possible future directions, but also point to specific papers when discussing open problems remaining in their area.

While a strong paper, I would have liked to see an overview of the Greedy(m,k) algorithm referenced several times throughout the paper. The authors did provide reference material, but based on the importance of the algorithm it would be beneficial to provide at least a superficial overview. I also think it's important to remember that because this is a paper that relates directly to a product, the authors have implicit bias towards their own solution. There is little discussion of competing commercial solutions such as Oracle or DB/2; although the paper mentions briefly that the competition has automated tuning available, it never compares its techniques directly.
