---
layout: post
title: 'Paper Review - Dremel: Interactive Analysis of Web-Scale Datasets' 
category: eecs584
---
Web scale data analysis is time consuming even with modern technologies. While Map-Reduce offers a flexible model for analyzing large scale data, it is still generally not near interactive speed and requires writing complex Java procedures to run. Dremel is a new take on petabyte-scale data analysis, offering a column storage based, interactive SQL approach to read only data. This new system is quite a bit different from well known SQL based interfaces to Map-Reduce such as Hive or Pig, because instead of simply translating SQL to MapReduce jobs it creates a new architecture in order to deliver results faster.

The primary contribution of this paper is the introduction of a columnar based storage system for nested data, aka data with repeatable and optional fields. Dremel does this by assigning two values to the column data - a repeated field that specifies which reptition the value represents, and a definition level to specify how many fields are actually defined. This layout is quite clever, and allows Dremel to store data in a column format and reap the benefits that come with columns for aggregate queries. The paper also introduces a new query language for the Dremel system, as well as providing a finite state method of reassembling the data structures from columns. Because Dremel is a shared nothing system, it uses a tree architecture to execute queries across many machines, with each eventually moving through the root server. Dremel's performance seems incredible from the data the paper presents, processing queries an order of magnitude or two faster than MapReduce alone. 

With any high performance system comes trade offs, and Dremel is no exception. Data in Dremel is read only, which is a massive limitation for any system that must fufill both storage and OLAP requirements. In order to actually execute data queries so quickly, the user must load up a separate cluster just to do analysis. I like that the paper provides algorithms for each of its components, but it does a poor job of explaining exactly how the underlying column storage works. Because we are never writing to the system, we alleviate most of the traditional database concerns. However, this aspect of the system still likely has pitfalls and gotchas, and an overview would have been nice. I would also be interested to see how data is actually stored on the system and split between nodes, as the actual process of loading data onto the cluster is completely skipped. This is likely because the Dremel team feels no need to introduce a proprietary piece of technology into the paper. Once again, papers from a commercial system lack details that would likely be required for implementation.
