---
layout: post
title: 'Paper Review - Fast Algorithms for Mining Association Rules' 
category: eecs584
---
Discovering associations in data allows businesses and scientists to form critical insights. In a business, association between buying habits of customers can create customized catalogues or online experiences. In a biology lab, associations between different chemicals or proteins can signify interesting research directions. Traditional association mining tends to be quite slow as it requires multiple passes over the data which is superlinear in time. This paper introduces *Apriori* mining, and two derivative algorithms, *Apriori-Tid* and *AprioriHybrid* that reduces the number of passes over a database required to count frequent itemsets.

The primary strength of this paper is the algorithm's ability to use previous sets (apriori information) to quickly find larger sets. All of the algorithms introduced in the paper generate candidate itemsets by using only the itemsets found to be large in previous passes. Because any subset of a large itemset must be large, the algorithm can join smaller sets and prune the search space by removing subsets that are not large. The paper also introduces the Tid and Hybrid algorithms to improve performance when disk access is expensive or to reduce passes by sometimes using Tid and sometimes using the usual algorithm. 

The authors include the precise algorithms for their contribution, as well as a substantial look at the performance of the apriori algorithm versus the competing best methods. Not only does apriori execute faster, but it also scales better with database size, which is even more important in today's world of big data sets. I like that the authors show the linearity of their algorithm via experimental evidence. While not as rigorous as a formal proof, it would be enough to make me confident choosing their algorithm in a product.

Association mining has inherent weaknesses that would require additional extensions to address. Common associations may not qualify as interesting, especially when associations are a result of the domain (for example, if a store requires two items be bought together). Additionally, data must be categorical, although this limitation can be fixed via binning. One final weakness that comes to mind is that many times there are associated quantities with items (such as amount of gas purchased). This algorithm would fail to incorporate this value, and simply repeating the item in the dataset will not work for an item with such fine granularity.
