---
layout: post
title: Paper Review - Anatomy of a Database System 
category: eecs584
---

This educational paper, written by Hellerstein and Stonebraker in 2005, serves to provide an overview of the Database Management System (DBMS) and offer lessons in their design to students and researchers. 

Relational database management systems are currently the most commonly deployed type of DBMS, and have one of the longest histories in computing, stemming from their use in early mainframes and business computing. Just as the authors argued in "What Goes Around Comes Around", young researchers and developers who were not present in the early days of databases will likely make similar mistakes as their predecessors. This problem is compounded by the lack of complete information on database systems. The authors argue that because of the driving industry forces behind DBMS implementations, it's difficult to find an academic treatment of the systems as a whole. This paper attempts to fill that void by providing context for academic examples and a birds eye view of the apparently monolithic database management systems.

As a learning resource, the paper is written in an informative manner and attempts to avoid any clear bias, although we must remember in a critical reading that the authors were responsible for research on Object Relational Database Models and the PostgreSQL project.

This paper is organized into four main sections (a fifth section exists but isn't included in this copy). These sections are

* Overall architecture
* Storage Models
* The Query Processor
* The Transactional Storage Manager

### Overall Architecture
The authors take a look at different architecture models and issues, such as how to split up the processing in the server (processes vs threads) and different historic workarounds (DBMS threads). We see different server setups, from shared memory to shared-nothing and the middleground shared disk. There is a short treatment of admission control (eg how to best degrade performance), and an overview of the modern standard practices.

### Storage Models
This section examines various storage options, the two largest being choosing between direct disk access via the DBMS or operating system disk access via the filesystem. For each option, the two major considerations are spatial control (being able to store sequentially on disk for best performance) and temporal control (being able to tell the system exactly when to write to disk). As a general rule, older systems would manage disk access themselves because operating systems were not yet mature enough to guarantee these controls. Modern operating systems tend to offer better control, but large DBMS products support both options due to legacy.

### Query Processor
The paper now turns to a more detailed discussion of subsystems, starting with the query processor. The processor takes in declarative statements, parses and authorizes the statements, rewires the query to simplify it, and then optimizes the internal representation of the query into a query plan. Finally the executor invokes procedures for the dataflow graph or op-code representation. The executor does this via iterators, which couple the dataflow with control flow. This section also provides a look at how data is located and accessed, as well as modified or deleted. Access methods that change disc data provide additional complications, and this transitions nicely to the final section.

### Transactional Storage Manager
The transactional storage manager is a large component of the DBMS that provides concurrency control, recovery, I/O staging, and access methods for organization of data. This section is weak, however, in comparison to the remainder of the paper. This is partly because of the massive scope of this component - the authors assert that an entire undergraduate course in databases is required, as well as a number of other seminal papers. While a full examination of the material would indeed be tedious, a short coverage of some of the history of these methods would be appreciated. The point of this paper is to prevent mistakes by educating students on the history of these systems, and a better treatment of that history would be appreciated.

The remainder of this section addresses ACID transactions, specifically how locking and logging manage the majority of these requirements (consistency is enforced by the query executor). This section is one of the most technical in the paper, and explores specific issues in each of the subsections of the transactional storage manager. There is a discussion of locks vs latches, as well as various isolation levels available in most DBMSes. This section also covers logging, as well as various combinations of issues pertaining to logs and locks together. Like the transactional storage manager itself, this part of the paper is intertwined and quite nuanced.

### Summary
This paper is written in a manner similar to a textbook, but without some of the background information included in each section. Although this paper attempts to bridge the gap between academia and industrial applications, there is highly technical and complex material that requires requisite background knowledge to understand. I think in some cases it would be have helpful to further explain concepts, instead of simply referencing an equally dense academic paper or product manual. In general, however, the paper is quite good and I especially appreciate the author's inclusion of typical practice in modern database management systems.
