---
layout: post
title: Uninformed Search 
category: eecs492
---

## How do we search?
Create a tree with nodes, we'll define nodes as either:

* Root node - Initial state
* Fringe node - A node along a path in the graph
* Leaf node - A node without children

Note, there is a difference between a state and a node. A node represents a state, but the state can be represented in different nodes. The path cost can be simple or complex.

Our node strategy dictates which node to expand to in any particular search situation. Candidates are nodes at the **frontier**, which we maintain in some kind of queue.

## Types of Search

### Tree Search
We'll assume the state space is a tree. The frontier is a queue of nodes (or partial paths). This search is basically how we'll look for a leaf of a tree data structure. The tree is built as we go along, and how we do the actual search is specific to depth or breadth first search.

What's the issue with this? If we have a cyclic graph, we can end up looping forever looking for a goal. What if we keep track of visited states?

### Graph Search
A more general search where the state space is a graph. The explored set holds nodes already explored, and when we search we only add nodes to the frontier if they are unexplored. 

## Infrastructure for Search
Each child node has a state, a parent, and a current path cost to get to that node. Usually we'll use a type of queue to store the data for our search, and this queue will change types depending on the search. 

How can we measure performance?

* Completeness - Can an algorithm find a solution
* Optimality - Can the algorithm find the optimal solution, usually in terms of path cost
* Time complexity - How long does it take to search
* Space complexity - How much memory is needed to search

Generally, uninformed search is limited in complexity.

## Uninformed Search
The simplest form of search, uses only information available to the algorithm. The distinguishing factor is the **search order**.

### Breadth-first search
We'll look for the solution at each layer, generally we'll find the shallowest solution first. For this search we use a FIFO queue. We test when the node is generated not expanded. This search discards any new path to a state we've already explored. The algorithm is complete, and possibly optimal if there is a non-decreasing path cost as we move down nodes.

**Time Complexity** - $$O(b^d)$$

**Space Complexity** - $$O(b^d)$$

Both are exponential, and breadth-first will almost always run out of space first.

### Uniform-Cost Search
When step costs are equal the BFS is optimal. If not, we can use UCS instead, where we care about path cost instead of hops. Uniform-Cost search expands node n with the lowest path cost. Now we use a priority queue for our data structure. The goal is tested for when a node is selected for expansion. All nodes at cost less than c are expanded first. The UCS is optimal and complete (given step cost above zero). For complexity, C-star is optimal solution and $$\epsilon$$ is step size.

**Time Complexity** - $$O(b^{1+[C^* / \epsilon]})$$

**Space Complexity** - $$O(b^{1+[C^* / \epsilon]})$$

### Depth First Search
We'll search from top to bottom first, using a LIFO queue. Although DFS is complete as a graph search, it's not optimal.

**Time Complexity** - Still $$O(b^m)$$ where m is the maximum depth. This is even worse.

**Space Complexity** - In graph search there is no advantage of BFS, but in tree search we can remove a node from memory after it's been explored. Storage requirement is now $$O(bm)$$ which is *linear*.
