---
layout: post
title: Adversarial Search 
category: eecs492
---
## Two Player Games
For now we'll deal with one other agent only, in fully observable deterministic environments. How do we characterize the other agent? We say the opponent is exactly opposed to us. We'll say it's a *zero sum game*, meaning the rewards don't change game to game.

These problems are hard, because the search trees are generally massive and exponential. How do we deal with this?

* New approaches must define the optimal move differently.
* We need to prune our search tree.
* Likely need a Heuristic evaluation function.

## Minimax
**Max ALWAYS goes first** (this will be on the exam). Also note there are rewards *and* penalties for the winner and loser.

* Terminal test - Returns true when the game is over.
* Utility - Defines a numeric value for a game that ends in a terminal state.

Game tree now models both players explicitly. 

#### Example - Tic Tac Toe
We'll say a win is +1 and a loss is -1, a tie is 0. 

## Decisions in Minimax
We will assume the opponent is playing optimally. Then we re-run minimax next turn.

## $$\alpha-\beta$$ Pruning
Minimax is inefficient, has $$O(b^m)$$ time complexity. We'll prune the tree by ignoring the moves *min* will ignore. Pruning like this lets us remove entire subtrees in many cases. This depth first search depends heavily on the ordering of the tree. Alpha-beta pruning can generally double our search depth!

## Evaluating in Real Time
With deep trees we can't even get to the end. We'll need to introduce an evaluation function to score a mid-level node. The heuristic should be strongly correlated with a good outcome. Introducing this adds uncertainty, however. Uncertainty doesn't change anything about the environment, but changes the computation. 

What if we evaluate the function via features?

$$E(s) = \sum \limits_{i=1}^n w_i f_i(s)$$

This misses dependencies however. We can use a heuristic in place of final state once we hit a certain depth. 

* Evaluation Function - Guess of utility function
* Utility Function - Final state of a game

## Stochastic Games
We can extend games to include random elements but this increases complexity by a large margin. We'll add *chance nodes* and calculate expected values. This is called **expectiminimax**.
