---
layout: post
title: Uncertainty 
category: eecs492
---
## Some Final Planning

### Contingent Planning
If we don't know about a conditional before hand we need to gather information before planning more actions. This leads to continuous replanning where we can't plan everything beforehand. This is generally how things work in the real world and with real time. In this case we want **online replanning** to change our action plan as new information comes in. This requires **execution monitoring** in the real world. 

### Multi-agent Planning
Having multiple agents whose actions depend on each other introduces complexity. There are a few types of multi-actor setting, but the most complicated is **multiagent** which creates a shared nothing system. Our focus is on multiple simultaneous actions. The way we do this is to decouple actions from actors as much as possible. We want to be **loosely coupled**. One common way to reconcile joint solutions is to use social laws and communication. An example is in sports - play on your side of the court and communicate when things become questionable ("I got it!").

## Probability (yay)
Describes uncertainty. Cool.

We talk about probability in AI in terms of "possible worlds", aka the **sample space**. 

### Some really chill axioms:

Probability expressed from 0 to 1:
$$ 0 \leq P(\omega) \leq 1 $$

Probability sums to 1:
$$ \sum\limits_{\omega \in \Omega} P(\omega) = 1 $$

Probabilities add for mutually exclusive events:
$$ P(a \vee b) = P(a) + P(b) $$

Probabilities add but must subtract intersect for non-mutually exclusive events:
$$ P(a \vee b) = P(a) + P(b) - P(a \wedge b) $$

### Types of Probabilities:
Priors: Unconditional chances
$$P(X=x)$$

Conditional Probabilities: 
$$P(a|b) = \frac{P(a \wedge b)}{P(b)}$$

