---
layout: post
title: First Order Logic 
category: eecs492
---
## Finish Prepositional Logic
A set of entailed sentences can only increase as sentences are added. Conclusions from inference rules are never defeated by further inference, thus the search will never need to backtrack. This means we don't adapt well because we can only become more specific and we'll think the entire history is true. **Everything we know now will remain true forever**. 

What does it mean to be complete? We can reach any goal in the search space. We do this by resolution, which is a complete inference algorithm when coupled with any complete search algorithm. We can use unit resolution to split up our knowledge base:

$$ \frac{(c \vee a_1 \vee a_2 ... \vee a_n) \wedge (~c \vee b_1 \vee b_2 ... \vee b_k)}{a_1 \vee a_2 ... \vee a_n \vee b_1 \vee b_2 ... \vee b_k} $$

To actually use this in an algorithm we must put this into conjunctive normal form, aka each sentance is a set of literals combined with or. We can use resolution refutation to try and prove the opposite of a statement. Eg, if we get a sentence $$P_{1,2}$$ we will try and prove $$\neg P_{1,2}$$. 

Resolution is powerful, but we may not always need the full strength (and thus full computational complexity). We can introduce restrictions on it by assuming either horn or definite clauses: forward or backward chaining. 

## Chaining
Forward chaining maintains for each rule a count of unsatisfied premises. We fill a queue with known facts, and go through the queue, inferring rules and reducing the count associated, adding new rules back in.

 
