---
layout: post
title: 'Paper Review - Relational Cloud: A Database-as-a-Service for the Cloud' 
category: eecs584
---
As more webservices are moved to the cloud, companies find themselves considering databases as a cloud service. In theory it makes sense - much of the cost of a database is on startup and administration. License fees and competent database administrators are expensive, but generally don't scale as the database does. Although on paper DBaaS makes sense, there are problems for both the database owners and the users. Database performance can be expensive in this model, requiring more money from the cloud provider. Additionally, companies don't trust random companies with their sensitive data. This paper introduces the Relational Cloud, a database designed as a service that attempts to alleviate some of these concerns. Note that at the time of this writing the DBaaS was just gaining traction, with Amazon and Microsoft's offerings just taking off the ground. At the time of this review, there are many competing DBaaS providers, including multiple paradigms and types of databases.

Relational cloud presents a few novel ideas. The first is that the database attempts to partition databases by machine, in order to better group tenants that can coexist on a machine. The second, related to this, is the use of a graph-based data partitioning algorithm to scale out complex workloads. The final contribution is an encryption layer that can operate on encrypted data and secure the user's information. This last contribution is an extremely powerful idea, and is later extended into a whole separate series of papers (CryptDB). I think the strongest contribution of this paper is in CryptDB, as privacy concerns are more and more relevant not only for corporations but also individuals. I believe that in the future we will see privacy in cloud services becoming a strong selling point, and the ability to operate on encrypted data is quite powerful.

To partition data, Relational Cloud uses a strategy based on workload. By looking at previous workloads, the analyzer attempts to partition the database in a way that minimizes the number of distributed transaction. This allows better performance, and because the operation is done at the database level we can avoid expensive virtual machines to contain the databases. Relational cloud uses an engine called Kairos to allocate resources across physical machines. Kairos uses non-linear optimization to minimize the number of machines required to support a workload, as well as balance load across machines. I think this paper should have included more information about Kairos, but the authors instead decided to publish a separate paper. For encrypted data transactions, the database supports several levels of encryption. The authors call this "adjustable security", meaning that they can choose how secure a tuple is based on what is required. Weaker encryption guarantees are made for tuples that must support operations, such as sorting and inequality checks. Each row is encrypted into an "onion", meaning that each value in the table is wrapped in layers of increasing encryption. 

For me, the biggest weakness of this paper is the number of offshoots it requires for understanding. The paper contains two powerful concepts, but offloads each of them into a separate paper. While the motivations behind this may be reasonable (each is a large subject), it makes it much harder to understand the system. I also would have liked a few more results, for example the performance of encryption on non-OTLP loads. I assume this analysis is contained within the other offshoot papers.
