---
layout: post
title: Graph Planning 
category: eecs492
---
## Backwards Search
In backwards search we do "regression planning" where we generate predecessors starting from the goal state. We aren't searching in isolation though, we are moving toward a target state. The problem is handling interactions between goal propositions.

Formally - If the domain can be expressed in PDDL, we can do regression search. Given a ground goal description g, ground action a:

$$ g' = (g - ADD(a)) \cup PRECOND(a) $$

## Heuristics for Planning
We want to develop admissible heuristics for planning, and then we can use A$$^\ast$$. We'll:

1. Treat the search as a graph
2. Nodes are states
3. Edges are actions

Planning graphs only work with propositional logic. The planning graph is state followed by action followed by state etc. Thus the graph is organized into layers, S0, A0, S1, A1, etc. Note that we need to describe mutually exclusive actions/states.  

Details:

1. Planning graphs are NOT search, they are a heuristic. As a result, you **cannot definitively answer whether a state is reachable**.
2. We CAN estimate how many steps to S

When we progress through the planning graph, we'll alternate between $$S_i$$ and $$A_i$$ until two consecutive levels are indentical. As we progress, mutex links monotonically decrease. 

## Mutexes
There are several mutex types:

1. Inconsistent Effects - One action negates the other
2. Interferences - Sequential constraint
3. Competing Needs - One precondition of an action is mutually exclusive with the precondition of another
4. Inconsistent Support - Two literals at the same level that are a negation of each other
