---
layout: post
title: Constraint Satisfaction 
category: eecs492
---
How do we introduce constraints to solve problems where the variables are linked. A few definitions:

* $$X$$ - a set of variables $$\lbrace X_1, ..., X_n \rbrace$$
* $$D$$ - set of domains $$\lbrace D_1, ..., D_n \rbrace$$
* $$C$$ - a set of constraints

A few more definitions in a constrained search problem, describes how variables are assigned.

* Consistent assignment - violates no constraints
* Partial assignment - assigns values to some variables
* Complete assignment - assigns values to all variables

We can create a constraint graph that represents variables and constraints. Once we introduce constraints, we vastly decrease the search space. **Constraints describe relationships**.

### Types of constraints

* Precedence constraints - things must be done in order
* Disjunctive constraints - limited resources affect order
* Time constraints - domain of others shrinks

### Consistency

* Node consistency - All values in domain satisfy unary constraints
* Arc consistency - Consistency between the domain and range
* Path consistency - Uses implicit constraints inferred by triples of variables
* K-consistency - Generalization of consistency with more relationships

In the case of multiple constraints, we can propagate constraints throughout the network. For arc consistency, we can use AC3. Path consistency lacks enforcement of unary constraints, and for this reason it's **not** arc consistent. 

### Solving CSPs
The simplest approach is uninformed search, but the search space is huge. Additionally, ordering doesn't matter. We need to combine search and consistency, we'll use *backtracking* to use search once we've reduced the space. The key is that consistency depends only on assigned variables, eg order doesn't matter. At a basic level this is like depth first search. In backtracking we use a heuristic to choose what to expand first (minimum remaining value).  
