---
layout: post
title: 'Paper Reivew - Requirements for Science Databases and SciDB' 
category: eecs584
---
As scientific endeavors generate more information on larger scales, big projects generally turn to databases as a way to maintain their experimental data. In this paper, the authors introduce SciDB, a database designed to accommodate scientists and their "big science" endeavors. The authors of the paper met with various members of large scientific projects, including the Large Hadron Collider and the Large Synoptic Survey Telescope. Also present were members of the industry, who were included ostensibly to increase the scope of the project but likely provided the majority of the funding for the database. The paper discusses the various features a database for scientists would require. Because the various scientific disciplines require a wide variety of data representations, it's difficult to include everyone's feature requests. In the end, SciDB appears to be a Matlab style "matrix" storage system, that allows for various dimensions of arrays, including arrays that are jagged to support structures such as graphs and other exotic designs.

While previous work has been done on scientific databases, it appears that all of the previous efforts failed in an attempt to be everything to everyone. Thus, some features of SciDB are left to the end user in hopes that they can support most people. Two important features of SciDB are quite novel, and powerful tools for the scientific community. The first is non-destructive edits, meaning that previous values are saved to allow scientists to see all experimental results. While other tools like BigTable have accommodated a time slice, this tool allows easier management by including an attribute titled "updatable" to arrays. Additionally, SciDB supports uncertainty in its queries. Thus, error bars (assuming a normal distribution) are computed and saved throughout the computation, allowing the user to keep track of precision easily and throughout the database chain. This is one of the concepts behind BlinkDB, although in Blink the error bars are specifically computed by the sampling interface and in SciDB they may be added by the user. Extending SciDB to include sampling may have been a better idea than extending BlinkDB to include matricies. 

The error bars also present a weakness in that they are parametric, and they assume that the underlying distribution is normal. It appears that the user is able to extend the error bar handling, which may be able to alleviate the problems. It's also worth noting that this paper had no actual product at the time of release. Although SciDB now exists, it was bold of the authors to release a paper based on theory alone (although the paper is more a proposal than a research product). One more interesting observation is that, somewhat not-unexpectedly, Stonebraker again uses this paper as an opportunity to tell his audience that "Postgres supported features years ago". While it does get tiresome to see him constantly push Postgres, it is nice to be reminded that object-relational databases exist and in many cases may provide a solution to a problem without building a new database.

One more thing - the SciDB website treats SciDB like a product even though it's open source, requring personal information to download. This is not the direction SciDB should be moving if it hopes to achieve widespread adoption.
