---
layout: post
title: 'Paper Review - Join Synopses for Approximate Query Answering' 
category: eecs584
---
This paper is quite similar the BlinkDB, and as such I will gloss over some technical aspects even though this paper was published first. Again, creating a query system that can answer with approximate answers is a powerful solution to large data warehousing and data mining. By allowing interactive queries (meaning queries that run in near real time), the user is hidden from the complexities of dealing with massive amounts of data as long as they remember their answers aren't perfect. In this paper the authors introduce join synopses for relational databases, and show that by using these join synopses a system can answer approximate queries with foreign key joins.

The paper introduces the problems with joining random samples, and shows that by doing so the results of the join will be poor. This is because (1) the results of a sample before the join and of a sample after the join are not the same and (2) joining random samples will result in even smaller outputs which reduce confidence in the results. Like BlinkDB, this paper proposes a sampling method based on distinguished samples. Unlike BlinkDB, Aqua is designed to compute "join synopses", which work to allow any arbitrary join. BlinkDB, on the other hand, samples from tables directly and does not specifically support joins. 

The authors also introduce a method of computing confidence bounds by extracting sub-samples from samples. To me this sounds just like bootstrapping, and I wonder why this terminology wasn't used in this paper and how this is different from the bootstrapping that BlinkDB does. I suspect that this is simply a change in terminology that occurred over the years. While bootstrapping is not a new technique, it has gained popularity in recent years. I did like that this paper offered some theoretical insight into its techniques and provided proofs of the join's correctness (although not fully here they do outline the basics and refer the reader to the full version of their paper). Because my project for this class involves modifying BlinkDB, I had trouble finding the actual mathematical underpinnings of the work (the references simply send the reader to a textbook). One obvious strength of the BlinkDB system is that its designed for distributed computing, while the Aqua system is overlaid on a commercial DBMS that is likely not designed to be shared-nothing. It remains to be seen as to whether or not the system can work atop a shared-nothing architecture such as Teradata. Part of this is because the paper is old enough that shared-nothing DBMS systems were not on the forefront of computing. 
