---
layout: post
title: 'Paper Review - Data Cube: A Relational Aggregation Operator Generalizing Group-By, Cross-Tab, and Sub-Totals'
category: eecs584
---
Traditional SQL statements for business intelligence tend to require data aggregation in the query results. This is generally done with GROUP BY, which allows the user to organize the returned data by certain column values. This presents a problem when attempting to "roll-up" data, or aggregate data over multiple levels. Note that unless otherwise stated, this review will be written from the perspective of the time of writing. The current SQL standard now supports datacubes, a testament to the paper's influence. 

This paper's primary contribution is the "CUBE" operator, which allows a user to aggregate table results over multiple dimensions, all the way to the largest possible view. The authors provide intuition to the results of this operation via the "ALL" keyword which acts as a placeholder in tuples where the actual value of the row is in a different column. For example, the final row in a 3d data cube query might be "ALL ALL ALL 941", where 941 represents a sum over all the other columns, and the ALL values are inconsequential (it makes no sense to have a value for an aggregation of categorical data, for example). The paper also introduces the "ROLLUP" operator, which allows a roll-up report by producing super-aggregates instead of a full cube. The paper also provides the algebra of the operators it discusses (GROUP BY, ROLLUP, and CUBE), as well as providing a syntax proposal for them.

One interesting thing to note is that the CUBE is the spanning case for the ROLLUP and GROUP BY operators; that is that ROLLUP and GROUP BY are the degenerate cases. The paper ends with a discussion of the ALL value, including the decision to note actually include it in the recommendation, and a look at other details of implementation. These details include decorations (columns dependent on grouping columns not in the GROUP BY), snowflake queries (a schema with many aggregation granularities), and details on how to compute ROLLUPs and CUBEs.

Strengths:

This paper acts as the seminal paper for data cubes, and as a result has had much influence on RDBMS design in the years after its publication. Including the implementation details is especially important, and the look at various classes of aggregate functions (distributive, algebraic, holistic) would be extremely helpful to me were I to implement this functionality myself. From a readability standpoint the paper does a good job of including examples and details.

Weaknesses:

This paper was written in 1997, when data analytics was still in its infancy. For larger datasets, like those common in modern companies, the data cube presents a massive amount of data to the user. While good for small queries, data cubes likely present too much information to be useful. Additionally, the paper fails to adequately discuss the expansion of the cube to higher dimensions, although it is assumed the cube is actually a hypercube. I expect, however, that very high dimensional cubes come with additional challenges such as how to aggregate the data in a meaningful way. Lastly, the cubes as they are are not flexible, requiring the aggregate functions defined by the DBMS. The authors assert that they attempted to allow the user to specify aggregate functions, but found it too troublesome. In modern business analytics, this assumption is probably untrue.
