---
layout: post
title: Data Models 
category: eecs584
---

This lecture will cover the paper "Anatomy of a Database System" by Hellerstein and Stonebraker. This paper is a retrospective of different data models and a history of the DBMS space in the past 50 or so years.

### The Beginning - Hierarchical
The first modern database was IMS, developed by IBM for the Apollo program to keep a BOM for the Saturn V. This database was tree structured; every model required a parent and children. This did a good job of separating local schema from the application but had bad physical independence because it specified an implementation. IMS had other problems because representing relationships were tricky or impossible with the tree. 

Additionally it was extremely hard to program because the programmer must do a record at a time search and hand optimize each query.

### CODASYL - Network/Graph
A standard was proposed to fix problems with the IMS model. Called CODASYL, it was a directed graph that made it much easier to model complex relationships. However, the result was so complex that it was slow and complicated to work with. 

### Relational
Ted Codd proposed a new model based on tables. Although is query language was complex, others (including SQL) were proposed. There was heavy pushback from the database community because of the new paradigm, but with IBM's introduction of DB/2 the model took off and SQL became the de facto query language.

### Alternatives and Extensions
The entity-relationship model was introduced in the mid 70s. This model was less complex than CODASYL but still allowed complex modeling based on relationships with attributes and multiplicities. There was a wave of R++ models which attempted to extend the relational model. Some of the improvements were good (like sets and tuples), but in the end never caught on. 

### Object Oriented
The semantic data model was introduced in the early 80s, and had a 'class' relationship system that supported inheritance. Although never adopted, there was a string of object oriented databases that attempted to use OO languages such as C++ to support native database interaction. This too failed as the market was small and niche.

### Object Relational
The first new technique to improve performance, the ORDB allowed the programmer to extend the relational system by specifying his or her own datatypes, operators, and access methods. This was good for things like 2d data or systems that don't deal with traditional values. Postgres comes out of this model. 

### Schema First or Later
Quick digression to discuss the difference between schema first vs schema later. The authors argue that schema later databases are rare and niche. 

### Semi-structured and XML
New models based on XML are out, and while the authors say XML for documents are here to stay they dislike XML for database models and think they're a CODASYL2. 
