---
layout: post
title: Data Representation 
category: eecs598
---

## Time vs Frequency Domain
We can represent signals in the time or frequency domain. Time can be okay, but many biological processes are repeating and so we can use the frequencies instead for analysis. Basic idea behind fourier analysis, won't bother going into details here. Read an undergrad textbook.

It's hard to model signals as time and space localized, however. For example, we can do a STFT and that will give us a look, but our window determines resolution and we can never have it all.

## Non-linear approaches
A few non-linear approaches are interested:

#### Poincare plot analysis
Plot the signal as a function of itself for various time points. This lets us see variability over time.

#### Entropy
Lets us quantify how regular or disordered a set A with categories a is. How do we extend to real signals? Approximate entropy. We basically window our signal and look for similar windows within the time series.

#### Lyapunov Exponents
Measures the rate at which closely spaced trajectories diverge. We want to see how signals relate.

#### Detrended Fluctuation Analysis
Useful for revealing the extent of long-range correlation in a time series. Usually we remove the mean, divide the signal into windows, and then study by windows.

## Template Matching
We want to somehow match templates to the signal.

#### Cross-correlation
Convolve two signals. Problematic because time variations change cross-correlation. We generally will use some time warping to compare. Chih-chun uses this in his morphological variability papers.

#### Alignment-techniques
Instead of just correlating, we'll use time warping. Good because it's simple and generally gives good performance. However, it's computationally expensive.
