---
layout: post
title: First Order Logic Day 2 
category: eecs492
---
## The Move to First Order Logic
We want to move away from propositional logic. Propositional logic is good because it's unambiguous but too specific - we want to allow variables in the logic. 

In first order logic we have objects (rooms, dogs, etc) and relations. Relations test a property of one or more objects, and with **no arguments** these are equivalent to propositional logic. 

Relations - properties that are links between variables
Function - input a tuple, output a value

First order logic is the same as propositional logic with variables. Obviously first order logic is more complicated, but it's in fact *much* more so. There are new variables in FOL called qualifier variables:

**$$\forall$$** - Says "for all", and is equivalent to a big conjunction.

**$$\exists$$** - Says "there exists", equivalent to a big disjunction.

We introduce restrictions to reduce complication:

* Unique-names assumption - Two names cannot be the same object
* Closed-world assumption - Any sentences unknown to be true are false
* Domain closure - There are no more domain objects than the ones specified

These assumptions allow us to more concisely specify logic. 

## Quantifiers
We'll use quantifiers using an ASK/TELL interface. We can tell explicit facts or we can tell via variables. We can ask for statements, or we can ask for variables, aka $$\exists$$ Person(x) $$\Rightarrow$$ {x/Robert} and {x\John}.

## Inference
Universal instantiation lets us infer any sentence by substituting a ground term for the variable. Aka:

$$\frac{\forall \nu \alpha}{Subst(\{\nu/\kappa\},\alpha)}$$

The same thing applies for $$\exists$$. Basically we reduce a higher order function by partially applying an argument.
