---
layout: post
title: 'Paper Review - l-Diversity: Privacy Beyond k-Anonymity' 
category: eecs584
---
As both industry and the sciences begin to leverage the vast amounts of data at their disposal, privacy becomes more important. As more data is published, it becomes more and more vital to anonymitize data that is released for study. The idea of k-Anonymity addressed this problem. K-Anonymity makes guarantees that each record is indistinguishable from at least k-1 other records with respect to certain attributes. The idea of k-anonymity is simple - for any item there must be k items that have the same field. While easy, this scheme presents problems.

The authors explain these problems and introduce their own notion of anonymity called l-diversity. The first problem occurs when certain attributes are too homogeneous. In this case, it may be possible to infer data simply based on elimination - if we know all but one attribute and that attribute is not diverse, then we can simply infer the result. The second problem occurs when an attacker has external knowledge of the system. For example, if two attributes only occur together then we can make assumptions about identity even in k-anonymous tables. The paper doesn't state, but implies, that this external knowledge need not be domain knowledge - with sufficient computational resources an attacker could use pattern recognition techniques to find data that occurs together.

The key insight between l-diversity is that (1) the attributes cannot be too homogeneous or distinct and (2) the attributes cannot be inferred by l-1 pieces of damaging background knowledge. The authors do a good job of quantifying and formalizing these intuitions. The paper uses Bayes-Optimal to model background knowledge as a probability distribution. A table is l-diverse if there are at least l well-represented values for a sensitive attribute. The paper further defines several ways to formalize "well-diverse". Entropy based diversity draws from information theory (remember that entropy is the "number of bits" required to represent a piece of data) to characterize diversity of an attribute. The authors also introduce a less-strict version they call recursive diversity. The paper finally offers algorithms and performance evaluation of l-diversity.

While l-diversity is a powerful formalization of anonymization, the paper does have some weaknesses. It seems as though it would be difficult to calculate an l-diverse table for many sensitive fields because of how many constraints are present in the scheme, especially for entropy-based diversity. I do like that this paper provides such strong theoretical guarantees, and I find that a major strength of this paper. Still, I could see it being difficult to convince the general public to use this method because it is much more difficult to grasp than k-anonymity. 
