---
layout: post
title: Paper Review - The Design of an Acquisitional Query Processor For Sensor Networks 
category: eecs584
---

Sensors for long term, low power monitoring present different challenges than traditional database workloads. This paper addresses common problems encountered when creating and deploying these networks, and offers solutions by the way of simple SQL extensions as well as low level query processing. Written in 2003, the issues discussed in this work are even more relevant nowadays - sensors are becoming even cheaper and as the "Internet of Things" looms on the horizon we must confront the reality of large scale and low power ad-hoc networks becoming commonplace. While the techniques in this document pertain mainly to scientific monitoring, they can be applied to home automation, building management, commercial operations, and an endless variety of other uses.

From the writing, this paper appears to consider itself among the first to truly consider a sensor network as a separate entity. Previous works attempt to offer more general solutions such as saving power on transmitting or processing. The novel idea explored in this paper is the idea that a sensor network can control its rate of sampling, and that many times the sampling rate is flexible with respect to other, more important goals (such as network longevity). The authors introduce the query language for their acquisitional query processor, which they call acquisitional query language. The AQL is basically an extension of SQL that allows specification of sampling rates, as well as windowing and view support (which the paper calls materialization points". The database in the paper, TinyDB, also supports event based queries that trigger based on external events. This is critical to maintaining long battery life (because polling is so expensive) and already supported via interrupts in most hardware. The query processor has a general idea of the power used for each query, and can optimize based on expected power usage both for queries and to ensure longevity of the system (ie set a sample rate based on lifetime).

The paper also explores ways to connect the sensor network, which is done via semantic routing tree. By storing metadata and knowing their parents properties, nodes can conserve power by avoiding unnecessary processing. I really like that this paper addresses these issues because it shows the authors are working on a very specific problem and not just trying to conserve power in a general network system. The sensor network can also adapt to heavy load by changing its sampling rate or choosing which tuples to drop in a congested network. While a short section, this part of the paper is a novel solution to network congestion and power reduction. By reducing or eliminating less useful data, the network can eliminate backlog and congestion while maintaining a good picture of the final data. 

While this paper did a good job of addressing the requirements of an ad-hoc sensor network, I think it could do better at implementation in some cases. Dropping data on a packet by packet basis is done crudely - data compression could make a big impact on the quality of the data the network receives. The authors do mention this fact and concede that the low processing power of the network prohibits expensive operations such as Fourier analysis. The authors also make assumptions about the data sent via sensor networks, assuming most of it is real valued and univariate. This paper works very well in scientific monitoring domains, but fails to extend to cases where higher dimensional data or textual data is required. While shortsighted, this is most likely because the authors had a specific application in mind and possibly failed to see the explosion of sensors and low energy devices that would occur in the future.
