---
layout: post
title: Paper Review - OTLP Through the Looking Glass and What We Found There
category: eecs584
---
Online transaction processing is an important subset of general database management systems that generally deals with business or commercial transactions. OTLP systems require high throughput and low latency, as most serve many users and make frequent updates. However, because the number of customers and their transaction information does not scale with Moore's law, OTLP databases are relatively small by today's standards. Written in 2008, this paper argues that it's time for a complete overhaul of OTLP database systems. The authors prove their point by completely removing most of the functionality of the Shore OTLP database to show how much code is wasted.

A key point in this paper is the use of main memory databases. In contrast to a traditional DBMS which lives on disk, a main memory database keeps all data in memory. This reduces or eliminates many problems with disk based DBMS systems, specifically rendering most of the disk access optimizations obsolete. Many of the architecture observations the authors make in this paper are implemented in their H-Store database system. The paper discusses the idea of a cluster of shared nothing machines that are memory resident and single threaded. Each CPU core acts as its own transaction manager, with its own memory space to completely eliminate locking. Instead of logging to disk, these systems would simply migrate data to available sites when there is a failure, thus maintaining availability without disk overhead.

The authors attempt to demonstrate the amount of CPU instruction that could be saved by eliminating and optimizing Shore. They remove sections one at a time, including locking, latching, multithreading, buffer management, and bookkeeping. At the end, they have a bare minimum database system that is both simpler and much faster. The resulting database system can be seen as a proof of concept for the performance of the H-Store system that the lab later develops. This paper lays the groundwork for H-Store and presents concrete evidence that much of the machinery of a modern DMBS is outdated and performance of memory-resident DBMSes can be improved by adapting a new architecture. In the final section of the paper the authors concretely state their vision for a new OTLP engine, and most of these features appear in H-Store.

This paper fails to address catastrophic failure events in main memory DBMSes, for example if the power goes out in a database center. I assume that a form of checkpointing or snapshotting would take place in any production main memory database, but this paper fails to address this. Additionally, even by removing most of the code from Shore, the authors fail to consider pre-compiled transactions in their speed comparisons or recommendations. A main memory, distributed DBMS must trade flexibility for speed and consistency. This tradeoff occurs in H-Store, and indeed must take place to remove locking and latching. However, this paper removes locking and latching without mentioning the flexibility trade offs that must take place in order to produce a production system similar to the one they are advocating.
