---
layout: post
title: Paper Review - Main Memory Database Systems - An Overview 
category: eecs584
---
Main memory database systems offer notable benefits for small databases such as online transaction processing systems. These benefits include faster queries, higher throughput, and simplified system architecture. Written in 1992, this paper has powerful and forward looking insights about the architecture decisions that need to go into a main memory database system. This paper is ahead of its time, as many of the concepts could not be applied for years after publication - main memory was falling in price but fitting large customer databases in memory for a reasonable price was still almost a decade away. Indeed, it wasn't until recently that modern juggernauts such as Microsoft SQL and Oracle started supporting memory resident systems. This paper also correctly predicted non-volatile main memory years before it had come to market.

This paper acts almost as a survey to main memory database systems, and looks at each part of a traditional DMBS and how it relates to a MMDB. The recurring observation made by the authors is that the disk is no longer the bottleneck of the system. This has several implications. First, contention on disk is almost eliminated, and as a result we can use larger lock granule sizes. Additionally, because main memory no longer favors sequential access, we can utilize different index structures and almost completely remove buffer management. Although beneficial, MMDBs do present some problems. Most critically, because memory is volatile, there must exist some persistent storage in case of power failure or crashes. Logging can be done in group commits to a disk, or using some sort of "stable main memory", which was a hypothetical concept when this paper was published. The database also flushes the entire system to disk occasionally, in the form of snapshots or checkpoints. The problem of how to store data on disk is also briefly mentioned, although the author's main point here is simply that there is no analogue to migration in a traditional DBMS. In the last section of this paper, the authors examine several main memory database systems available at the time of writing. However, being such an old paper (in terms of technology), much of this section is outdated.

This paper is quite ahead of its time, but it still has a few weaknesses. First, some of the technology discussed did not exist in 1992 at the time of publication. Non-volatile memory is just now coming out. While this is okay from a theoretical perspective, the paper doesn't point out that this technology is undeveloped. I am a bit surprised that the authors didn't foresee the use of shared nothing systems in this paper - the idea of shared nothing wasn't unheard of at the time of writing and the authors likely were aware that extremely high density main memory would be expensive, even in the future. Finally, the authors advocate T-trees for memory resident database systems, but research has shown that T-trees may not actually offer noticeable benefits to a DBMS. The authors were likely simply using the results of T-tree research.
