---
layout: post
title: Introduction 
category: eecs586
---

## Course Logistics
This class is more about design of algorithms than analysis, but many times you'll need to prove you can't do better. Median grade is a high B+, grading is based on homework and a final. Everything must be typed!

## Introduction
Algorithms are as important as the hardware. Mostly in this class we'll determine bounds on algorithms, for example via the intergral test. 

Small o: f is an upper bound but not very good, generally little o isn't very helpful.

## O-notation
There are a few ways to describe runtimes:

* $$\Theta(n)$$: Order of, gives high and low bounds
* $$O(n)$$: Order most of, gives high bound
* $$\Omega(n)$$: Order at least, gives low bound
* $$o(n)$$: Order less than, generally gives less information, think of as < instead of <=
* $$\omega(n)$$: Order greater than, same as small o

## Best/Worst/Avg Case
Sequential search: something is holding data, we can only go sequentially, trying to find a value.

Suppose: 

A(1:n) of some key type (=,<,>)
x of same key type

Is x in A?

#### Notation
y cand z = if y false then false
            else z

Suppose we just search straightforward. Loop and look. What's the runtime? 

Best Case (Fastest)

$$ \Theta(1) $$
if x present and A(1)=x

Worst Case (**This is what we care about**)

$$ \Theta(n) $$
if x absent or
A(n)=x and x doesn't appear sooner

Average Case

We don't know without knowing more about the system! We need probability distributions or other known facts. 
If we suppose that prob(i) is the prob that first occurence of x is at i, and we suppose x is present, then we can say expected num of items examined is:

$$ \sum_{i=1}^{n} i prob(i) $$

Time = $$\Theta$$ (Num of items examined)


