---
layout: post
title: Sorting 
category: eecs586
---
## Sorting Basics
Sorting Assumptions:
* n items
* key (perhaps plus data)
* key type has {=,<,>} operations

Major Dichotomy:
* Internal, or all data in RAM
* External, or all data in ROM (IOPs dominate)

We'll focus on RAM and not worry about IO. The book mentions selection/insertion sort ($$\Theta(n^2)$$) and merge sort ($$\Theta(n \log n)$$). Counting sort (section 8.2) is a stable sort with $$\Theta(n+k)$$ time if keys are in k. 

**Stable Sort** - If key i and key j are the same, and $$i \lt j$$, then the final sorted order results in key i (and its data) occuring before key j (and its data).

## Radix sort (8.3)
Keys are d digits base b. Sort digit by digit (stable). In many cases we'll claim that radix is linear time ($$\Theta(d(n+b))$$) but it depends. If d and b are fixed it's linear time. If we fix b, we want key space to be large enough so that n keys distinct. In this case we need to grow d, where $$ d \gte \log_b n $$.

## Bucket sort (8.4)
Keys are numbers in [0,1). Suppose uniform random IID keys. This assumption is big. We sort into buckets and then insertion sort through them. Worst case of this sort is $$O(n^3)$$, where all keys are in the same bucket. See handouts. 

Expected time of bucket sort?

Book shows the proof using indicator variables. Let's talk about a different proof. Expected bucket size is n. Time to sort bucket is constant. This isn't always right though - the expected time of sorting the bucket isn't equal to the sorting time of expected bucket size.

Why do I go to this class?
