---
layout: post
title: Trees
category: eecs545
---
## Binary Search Trees
Binary search has insert, delete, and search. These operations are the important part, because searching is easy. To search we just do a compare at each level of the tree, we can search in log(n) no problem. Insert is also easy, just do a search and if it's not where we expect put in our element. Delete is a little more complicated. If our element to delete is a leaf we remove it. If it's a node with one child, just remove it and connect the severed parts. If it's a node with two children, we could just promote one subtree and then hang the other one off of that. This is valid but poor. The better option is to take the smallest part of the right tree and promote it to the delete node's location.

For a given tree, the worst cases are:

* Search: $$\Theta(n)$$ for an unbalanced tree
* Insert: $$\Theta(n)$$
* Delete: 

The best case to build up a tree is n log n, because any faster would mean that we have a sorting algorithm that's better than n log n, and that's provably impossible. 

Expected Search time is different. If all trees are equally likely the expected depth is about $$\sqrt(\pi n)$$. This assumption is dumb though...we don't build trees to be equally likely. We'll instead assume that all input orderings are equally likely (no duplicates). 

Time to insert = time to find
average search time = time to build/n

When we build up trees the balanced tree is most likely. The average number of comparisons to build a tree is the same as quicksort. Building a tree is basically quicksort anyway. 

Now something totally different:

Assume each new insertion is a new key we've never seen.

IIIDI, this is 72 equally likely trees (4!x3 options for each D). There are 25 possible balanced trees, which is better than 1/3 which is good. 

## Red-Black Trees
Every node will be either red or black (these are NOT keys). Rule are:

* Red parent cannot have red child
* From any node to a leaf, the number of blacks is always the same


